still cloudy skies and it’s on the
cool side again. You can see the
cool side again. You ran see the
extent of
cool side again. You can see the
extent of the cloud we’ve got on
Saturday, a bit of drizzly weather
Saturday, a bit of driuly weather
affecting
Saturday, a bit of drizzly weather
affecting Scotland, north—east
affecting Scotland, north-east
England, a
affecting Scotland, north—east
England, a few showers further south
than this time affecting the
south—west of England as well.
Temperature struggling up to around
Temperature stmggling up to around
12-13 in
Temperature struggling up to around
12—13 in like winds. To the second
12-13 in like winds. To the second
half of the
12—13 in like winds. To the second
half of the weekend, a lot of cloud
but this time I think the cloud
should be a bit thinner so a better
chance of seeing some sunshine
perhaps although having said that
for Scotland and north—east England
for Scotland and north-east England
it’s going to be
for Scotland and north—east England
it’s going to be cold on Sunday. May
be signs of a bit of rain arriving
in Northern Ireland, north—west
Scotland later in the day, that’s a
sign of things to come. Instead of
high pressure that we’ve got over
the weekend, its low pressure
dominate early next week. Next week.
dominate earty next week. Next week.
A rather
dominate early next week. Next week.
A rather complicated and messy
tangle of weather fronts. I can
tangla of weather fronts. I ran
simplify
tangle of weather fronts. I can
simplify that for you. Early next
simplify that for you. Earty next
week
simplify that for you. Early next
week the weather is changing and
I don’t want to even want to speak.
This music’s way too smooth.
But how can sound waves physically
make you move?
And in return, you get experiences
you like. It lifts you high.
ASTRONAUT: Earth’s starting
to look pretty small now.
Be moved by...
GASP
SCREECHING CRY
You want to change the world?
Come with me and we will change
them all.
Hold tight!
Lyra. Lyra!
Lyra!
Victory!
SHE SCREAMS
You keep using that word — lie.
It’s not the lie, it’s the cover—up.
You know the Prime Minister.
Yeah, I do — petty.
I mean no disrespect, but the time
has come for a totally new approach.
Are there any other scandals
we need to know about, Peter?
It’s somebody that says
she’s your daughter.
The briefing you asked for
on Peter Laurence —
MI5 put it together.
Do I have any value to you
except as a liar?
I’m going to nail Peter Laurence
once and for all.
I have always been a mle breaker.
It’s my USP.
Every politician
expects to be Prime Minister.
So you’re saying you’re clean?
Squeaky.
What makes World Service so unique
is its genuine world perspective,
notjust in news but actual
cultural landscape.
Well, I grew up with the
World Service
as the soundtrack to my life.
We were never really cut off so long
as you had the BBC.
That’s where we heard the real news,
a window to what’s going on in the
outside world.
I can be out in the garden raking
leaves, doing mindless labour,
and yet feel as if I’m being put in
touch with the world.
The whole world.
Welcome to Question Time. On
tonight’s panel... Douglas Ross, MP
since 2017. He left the Government
in protest after the behaviour of
the Dominik —— of Dominic Cummings,
the Dominik -- of Dominic Cummings,
Boris johnson’s
the Dominik —— of Dominic Cummings,
Boris Johnson’s adviser.
Joining us down the line from
London, Seema Malhotra, a former
and then to become
the Government’s first female
Finance Secretary.
If“:
Kate Forbes, NSP for
Kate Forbes, NSP forformat
Kate Forbes, NSP for format years.
The Government’s first female
Finance Secretary.
Also, joining the debate
via video link, Professor
Mark Walport, member of Sage,
the Government’s scientific advisory
group, and immunologist, former
director of the Wellcome Trust and
former chief scientific
adviser to the Government.
management consultant,
adviser to Harriet Harman
and Shadow Treasury Minister
And a man who rose in the oil
industry made for mischievous
philanthropic work, Ian Wood. Good
evening. Welcome to my guests in the
studio and to Seema and Mark,
joining down the line, and of course
to our audience again joining
to our audience againjoining by
to our audience again joining by
video link,
to our audience againjoining by
video link, very good to have US us.
Tonight you are all from Edinburgh
and the Edinburgh area.
Thank
you for
you forjoining, and of course to
you at home watching, if you want to
join in as well, you know how to do
it, on social media and at Question
Time, join the conversation and
debate does not let here our first
question tonight, which is Diane
Craig... Thank you, Fiona.
Do you think that this pandemic
has been managed better
by Nicola Sturgeon in Scotland
than it has by Boris
Johnson in England
ﬂ
I think it is certainly not a
competition. It is about managing
how to balance that with managing
the other harms, whether social,
health or economic. With the polling
health or economic. with the polling
this
health or economic. With the polling
this week we have seen three
quarters of people in Scotland are
satisfied and how Nicola Sturgeon
has handled the pandemic is do you
think she has handled it better than
Boris
BorisJohnson? I think she has
handled it in a remarkable way. I
handled it in a remarkabla way. I
think it is
handled it in a remarkable way. I
think it is one of the most
challenging situations for any
leader to bn and at the beginning
she said we would make mistakes and
she has been upfront throughout,
with honesty and integrity, that
things have been challenging.
Scotland has a higher infection
growth rate than in England and the
UK as a whole. Sire might but we
UK as a whola. Sire might but we
also have
UK as a whole. Sire might but we
also have the lowest rates per
hundred thousand than anywhere in
the UK and those are the figures
that matter. We know because we
suppressed it so low during the
summer and schools and universities
went back earlier, we are seeing the
went back eartier, we are seeing the
figures increase,
went back earlier, we are seeing the
figures increase, which is why early
figures increase, which is why earty
action is key to
figures increase, which is why early
action is key to avoiding a complete
lockdown, and I think Nicola
Sturgeon has done that. Certainly
this week’s figures in terms of
dissatisfaction with the Prime
Minister, in Scotland it is very
high.
It’s almost the inverse —
76% are dissatisfied with the way
the Prime Minister’s handled it —
but from my perspective
the challenge for every
Government, notjust in the UK
but across the world,
is to suppress the virus,
to keep the trust of the people,
and to ensure that we manage these
other harms in terms of the economy
or society more widely.
Well, Diane’s question
is very pointed.
Who is managing it better,
Nicola Sturgeon or BorisJohnson?
Douglas Ross?
I don’t think anyone can treat
this as a competition...
But that is the question.
..when people continue
to lose their lives,
when people continue to be infected
at an alarming rate.
But I think we do have
to look across the UK.
There has been similar approach
taken by all four governments,
and indeed around the world
we are still learning
about this virus.
A virus that didn’t even exist
this time last year.
There have the mistakes,
and big mistakes, in Scotland,
and we’ve got to accept that
and listen to the advice
we’re hearing when these mistakes
are made, and learn from them,
because in Scotland we had people
testing positive for Covid—19
in a hospital being
discharged into a care home.
We can’t allow that to happen.
We’ve got to learn from that.
And Nicola Sturgeon told us we would
learn from this and there would be
a report in September.
We are still waiting
in October for that.
We have the highest percentage
of deaths in the care home setting
anywhere in the UK here in Scotland.
So no one can claim a success.
It is a battle that we are all still
fighting, it is one that
continues to take lives,
it is one we are still trying to get
on top of, and that’s
just the health battle —
we’ve also got the economic hotspots
to deal with as well.
And are you satisfied
with the way BorisJohnson
is handling the pandemic?
There have been mistakes
by the UK Government,
by the Scottish Government,
by governments around the world.
There have been errors made,
and at some time...
So what do you think the UK
Government has done wrong?
At something we will look back
and say, "This should have been done
differently", but I don’t think
anyone objectively can look
at what has happened in Scotland
and see what has been
the big difference.
What has the Scottish
Government done differently
from the rest of the UK?
There are areas where I think
the Scottish Government have
to learn, for example testing
positive people for Covid—19
in hospital and then putting
them into a care home.
That was the worst thing that
could have happened.
Humzah, in ouraudience,
you’ve got your hand up.
Hi.
So with regards to mistakes
and Nicole Sturgeon,
what is the concrete evidence
that the First Minister has used
in justifying her decision to crush
the hospitality sector and saying
that the recent spike in cases have
come directly from pubs,
bars and restaurants?
OK.
I will let you come back in.
I’m just going to deal with the main
question here from Diane,
which is "Has this pandemic been
managed better by
Nicola Sturgeon in Scotland than it
has by BorisJohnson in England?"
And neither of you say...
Neither want to say,
and you’re both at pains to point
out it’s not a competition,
because it does matter to people
who has handled it well
because lives are at stake.
Mark, do you feel that either
government is listening
to you, to the advice
you are giving at Sage?
I’ve got no doubt that
the governments are listening,
and I’ve also got no doubt that
everyone’s trying as hard
as they possibly can.
Yes, I’ve got no doubt
that they are listening
to the advice, the scientific
advice, they are getting,
but frankly I think the wrong
question is being asked because it’s
not internal comparisons,
it is actually looking at other
countries that are doing well.
50 South Korea, Vietnam, Germany.
I think what we have to do
is learn from what’s working
well in other countries,
and frankly I think it would be
easier if there was a bit more
commonality in the approach
across all of the nations of the UK.
And also we saw the advice
that was released by Sage this week,
the advice that was given
to the governments
on the 21st of September.
From what we can see,
neither the Scottish Government nor
the UK Government are following much
of the advice that Sage was giving?
Well, they are following some of it,
but the bottom line of course
is that Sage is looking purely
through the lens of controlling
the pandemic, and they’re also
having to balance the very difficult
tightrope of the miserable health
consequences for other people
as well, which is the effects
of the economic damage,
the unemployment,
the damage to education.
But I think what we have to do
is we need a really clear
strategy, and I think that’s
been less visible.
What we have to do,
frankly, is learn to live
with the virus whilst working
on the therapeutics and vaccines.
And we’ve got to get it under
control, but keep it under control
with much better public
health logistic delivery.
Lucas, you’ve got your hand up.
Yeah, so none of the panellists have
actually been able to answer,
really, who has performed better,
Nicola Sturgeon or Borisjohnson,
and of course it’s a horrendously
difficult period for both of them,
but why, and can they explain
the disparity between public opinion
in how they’ve handled it?
Clearly, people believe
that Nicola Sturgeon has
performed so much better.
Grant, you’ve got your hand up.
Yeah, I just wanted to follow
on from what Douglas was saying,
and exactly what Lucas was saying.
If both Holyrood and Westminster
have both made mistakes,
is there a lesson to be learned
for the UK Government
in the way that the public
are receiving Holyrood
and Nicole Sturgeon so favourably?
Seema Malhotra,
who do you think has performed
better out of the two?
I think we are in a decisive moment
in our efforts to tackle
the coronavirus, and the numbers
are clearly moving in the wrong
direction, and that’s
across Scotland as well as England,
and my worry is that neither
government is learning
from the mistakes that were made
very earty on.
The UK Government, it seems to me,
has lost control of the virus.
They are losing confidence,
and there are no longer
and they are no longer
following scientific advice.
We’ve also not seen Nicola Sturgeon
come forward to follow
the scientific advice that came
through in the way
that it did from Sage.
And, under the SNP Government,
you’ve already mentioned that we’ve
got the highest R rate in the UK.
Both governments were far too
slow in setting up test,
track and isolate, or Test
and Protect, and my worry is that
with those businesses
and livelihoods at stake now,
if we don’t have a way in which both
governments are going to learn
from what’s gone wrong and be honest
and open about it and work
together more closely,
we’re going to see us
going into a winter where it’s
going to be much more
difficult for all of us.
That’s why Labour has called
this week, as you know,
for a 2—3 week circuit break,
in line with Sage advice.
And what does that mean, Seema?
Sorry to interrupt, but what does
that mean, circuit break?
How would you define that?
It is in what Sage has also said,
that it would be more along
the lines of where we were in May
with people staying at home,
but there can be variations on that
because we are further forward.
And what’s been very
clearfrom Keir Starmer,
and from the Labour Party,
is that we need to keep
schools open, and I think
that is fairly universally felt,
that we should do what we can
to keep schools open,
but if we are to have a circuit
break and that means to setback
the virus by maybe 28 days,
it’s estimated, the estimate also
being that we could save 8,000 lives
because we get it under control
prior to Christmas and we protect
the NHS in doing that.
Surely that’s got to be
advise that we listen to,
because if we delay,
as the Government has repeatedly,
then the consequences
will be far greater,
both in terms of impact
on jobs and livelihoods,
but also on the nation’s health
and the number of deaths.
And do you support what the Mayor
of Greater Manchester,
Andy Burnham, is saying?
A Labour man, obviously,
in terms of he doesn’t want to see
further lockdown in his area,
despite what you’re saying?
Well, I’ve been in touch with Andy,
and I think one of the critical
things has been that it hasn’t felt
that the evidence on which those
decisions are being made and the way
in which local leaders are involved
has been anywhere near what we need
to see, and Ijust don’t understand
why we have both a UK Government
that is over many years seen cuts
to local Government,
that has made local government less
resilient, and also
the Scottish Government has cut
funding to local government
in Scotland by much more
than has been cut in terms
of budgets from Westminster.
You know, this lack of resilience
has made it increasingly difficult,
but what we’ve seen is that local
authorities, when they have been
able to go about track and trace,
have actually been doing far better
than Serco and others
on whom the Government
is spending 12 billion,
so there’s a real
question of confidence...
0K. . .
..and engagement with local leaders.
And also, the key thing,
that financial support has to go
hand in hand with those
restrictions, and the Government has
not had the trust of local
authorities and local leaders that
that is happening.
Ian, there’s a great reluctance
to answer the question which Diane
has put,
so I think we must try
and do it justice,
which is "Do you think this pandemic
has been managed better
by Nicola Sturgeon in Scotland than
it has by BorisJohnson in England?"
So far none of the politicians
want to answer that question.
0K.
I honestly think it’s
the wrong question.
But it is THE question.
That is the thing.
Well, 0K.
Right now we are faced with probably
the biggest health crisis
the world has ever had,
and that’s applying across the world
— all countries are facing
a myriad of problems.
I think in Scotland’s case, our
biggest tragedy was the care homes.
I think, generally,
we undoubtedly, on the first wave,
restarted too quickly,
we tried to get going too quickly,
and we now got a huge second wave.
I think, frankly, with the students
coming back in the way they did —
I hate to say this —
but I think that was a bad decision.
I think that’s undoubtedly added.
You think the universities
should have stayed closed?
The real question...
Well, not closed,
but done it all online.
Perfectly feasible.
The real question
is what do we do now?
How do we keep working at this
problem and get past the second
wave more successfully
than the first wave?
That’s what we should
be concentrating on.
We spend far too much time
in Scotland and the UK arguing who’s
right and who’s wrong.
We are now at a stage, frankly,
where we’ve got to make some clear
decisions and try to get this
next stage right.
Mark, you wanted to come back in.
Yes.
I mean, what we have to do perhaps
to get on top of this infection,
and that involves tight social
restrictions on movement,
and only then will public health
measures work effectively,
but we’ve got to get them working,
and as I say the real opportunity
is to actually learn from what’s
been done abroad rather than having
I think rather fruitless
internal competition
about whether Scotland
or England is doing better.
They could both do better.
Susan Young.
Yeah, just picking up on a point
that Douglas Ross made there,
that he doesn’t feel that different
parts of the UK have done anything
particularly different in handling
the pandemic,
and yet that doesn’t equate
to the very, very clear public
opinion polls as to who indeed has
handled it better between
Nicola Sturgeon and Borisjohnson.
So surely this absolutely comes
down to communication
from the two governments.
Whereas obviously we have very
clear communication daily
from Nicola Sturgeon,
and yet not from Borisjohnson.
Is that, do you think,
Douglas, what the difference
in opinion polls as?
in opinion polls is?
Miriam.
Yeah.
I think you’ve hit the nail
on the head there.
I think what one of the clearest
kind of distinctions between the two
diverging approaches,
and I think it’s important
to recognise here, that actually
we had a four nations approach
beforehand which veered off path
when BorisJohnson decided to,
in my opinion, kind of pre—emptively
ease lockdown, and we’ve since seen
a four nations approach.
said,
I think on your point
on messaging, that’s key —
when polled, 80% of people
in Scotland said the Scottish
Government has good communication,
and 72% of people in Scotland said
that the UK Government has bad
communication strategyjust now,
so I think that gets to really one
of the key distinctions there.
More broadly, though, and Seema
touched upon that a moment ago,
I think one of the key issues
that we need to address in terms
of our handling of this crisis more
broadly is the scale of outsourcing
that we have seen throughout
this entire pandemic.
We are seeing consultants
being brought in for a week
who are being paid a year’s worth
of nurses’ salaries.
We are seeing Deloitte, Serco,
McKinsey, being brought in —
consultancy firms who are looking
to maximise profit and who do not
have expertise in public health —
are being brought in to oversee how
we respond to test, track and trace.
Now, that, for me,
is an abject failure.
Why should the taxes of key workers
who are trying so hard just now
to help alleviate this crisis line
the pockets of corporations who
are not experts in public health?
So for me what we need
to do, if it is the case
that we are recommended
to have a circuit break,
if it is the case that we are
recommended to have another
lockdown, we need to take a moment,
step back, reassess our current
approach and recognise that public
health should be in public hands
and use that as the mantra
going forward to guide us.
So, Douglas, what did you think
when we saw today about private
consultants getting up to seven
grand a day in terms
of helping the Government?
Do you think that right?
Is that where the money
should be going?
Well, I think we’ve also got
to remember during this pandemic
the private sector have been
involved in terms of generating
the ventilation capacity.
Right at the start
of the biggest concern
in Scotland and across the UK
was that we wouldn’t have that...
But what about the point
that Miriam’s making?
So I think we’ve got to remember
the private sector have worked
with the public sector to ensure...
Sure, but in terms of the point
that Miriam’s making,
consultants getting seven
grand a day?
Well, you know, I’m not
going to defend levels like that,
but we can’t just say that
all of the private sector
was wrong to get involved...
I mean, obviously, your
Government’s paying for it.
Well, we’re paying for it, you know.
As in the taxpayer’s paying for it.
Susan, Lucas and Grant
have all made the point,
and I don’t think anyone on this
panel from the respective parties
and quite opposing party political
views has been able to say anything
that the Scottish Government
have done differently
from the UK Government.
It has been a UK—wide
approach, it is one...
Well, I can.
It is one that has largely been
the same right across...
Yeah, but different measures have
been taken at different times.
But I do agree with Susan.
It does come down to communications,
because Nicola Sturgeon...
It’s not just communication.
Sorry, Kate, if I canjust
finish, Nicola Sturgeon
is a very good communicator.
She is on our television every
day in Scotland doing
the daily briefings,
but when it comes down to the detail
we still have, as you said, Fiona,
the highest R rate anywhere
in the United Kingdom,
the highest percentage of deaths
in care homes anywhere
in the United Kingdom,
one of the highest death rates
per head of population in Europe.
So there are clear challenges we’ve
got to face, and as Sir Ian said,
we got to learn from the mistakes
we’ve made because we are seven
months into this pandemic now
and we are probably closer
to where we were in March than
we are at the end of this crisis.
We’ve still got a lot to go through,
we’ve still got a lot to learn from,
and we cannot make the same mistakes
in the next seven months...
Absolutely.
..that have been made
in the seven months before.
The most important lesson...
And that’s why, Kate,
your government has to explain
what happened to these people...
The most important lesson
to learn is moving quickly,
well they might if we’ve learned
anything from the beginning
of the pandemic back in March,
it’s that the more decisively
you act, the quicker you act,
the faster you can suppress
the virus and get it under control.
Now, Seema talked about...
So why is the R rate
so high in Scotland?
Seema talked about the need
for a circuit breaker.
Now, she may be aware
that we are currently in the midst
of increased lockdown restrictions.
Some of them are localised,
but we have national restrictions
right across Scotland right now,
and the idea is working quickly
and decisively with this two—week
period to try and bring the numbers
under control, and it’s not acting
quickly that matters.
But if, as you say, Kate —
because it is a puzzle,
and I’m not necessarily sure you’ll
have the answer — but if,
as you say, Nicola Sturgeon
is acting quickly and her
communication skills are good,
why is the infection rate
so high in Scotland?
What’s going on?
But you’re choosing one
infection rate, you’re
talking about the R number.
What I’m talking about...
Well, it’s pretty important.
It’s important, but what we really
look at at the moment
is the rates per 100,000.
That’s what matters.
And in terms of across the UK,
if you look at the figures rising,
the Prime Minister announced
his three—tier approach.
I’m not sure that will go far enough
in terms of suppressing the virus
in the way that we need to.
We are in the midst of a two—week
increased lockdown right now.
But the other difference —
it’s notjust about communication,
because this requires the public’s
consent and it requires political
leader clinic to treat
the public like adults,
ultimately we are depended
on the public following the rules
and regulations and understanding
the evidence behind it,
and that is the key to communication
and that’s what I think
distinguishes the First Minister
from the Prime Minister.
There’s quite a few hands up.
Let’s hear from some of them.
Toby?
Thank you.
I feel like as a young person
it’s very easy for me
to answer this question.
Nicola Sturgeon wasn’t the one
who had one of his chief advisers
break the lockdown rules and then
not even be effectively criticised.
I mean, from that perspective,
I feel like itjust sums up
BorisJohnson’s whole approach
to the whole pandemic.
Kate?
Hi.
Yes.
Douglas says that nobody can
point to any difference.
I think he’s missing the point,
that this is about leadership.
It’s not about numbers.
Looking simply at numbers disregards
that, that if you don’t
have the people with you,
regardless of how hard
you lockdown, you’re not
going to get people to comply —
you’re going to actually get people
starting to believe all kinds
of conspiracy theories,
and you’re going to end
up with noncompliance.
So this is about a difference
in leadership, hearts and minds.
It isn’t about a
difference in R rates.
Diane, you ask the question.
What you think about what heard?
Yeah, certainly I don’t think
it was a competition and that wasn’t
why I asked the question,
but I do feel that Nicola Sturgeon
has communicated very well.
She hasn’t shied away from questions
from the press and TV presenters,
as Boris and his ministers have
done, and I think she has made clear
cut decisions that she has explained
well and she’s earned the respect
from the people, and, you know,
she needs the people on board
to follow what she wants them to do,
and that’s precisely what she’s
doing, rather than hiding away
like Boris is doing.
Well, I’m going to move on,
if I may, because you had
a good go, Douglas.
There will be other
things for you to say.
Just on the quick action
of the Scottish Government,
if I can, just very quickly...
Very briefly.
It’s really important
there is quick action,
but also quick action
for the businesses affected and Kate
is Finance Secretary here
in Scotland and they are waiting ten
days now to get information...
A far more generous package
of support than the UK
Government is providing.
That matters.
They were told to close at 51 hours’
notice and they had to wait ten
days to find out they’re
getting £40 million.
We don’t know how that is going
to be delivered, and that pales
into insignificance. ..
And we’ve got the end
of the furlough...
..The £700 million that
the Chancellor’s making available...
..costing Scottish jobs,
in a few weeks’ time.
Please, Kate, just use your speed
and your urgency to get that money
out to businesses, please.
We are going to come onto business,
OK, but before we do,
because I want to get another
question in — I want to mention that
next week we are looking for people
to join a virtual audience
in Sedgefield, and a week
after that in Lincoln,
if you live in the area do,
please, get in touch.
Go to the Question Time website
and you can fill in the form there.
Do get involved.
We love to hear from you.
Be part of their virtual audience.
Right, let’s come
to our next question,
which is from Martin Dundas...
Thanks, Fiona.
When is cafe a restaurant
and a restaurant a bar?
And does it differ in Edinburgh,
Cardiff, Belfast or London?
Well, thank you for that, Martin.
I’m looking at the regulations.
So let’s take cafe, for example.
So you can sit down and eat
in a cafe in Edinburgh,
but only between 63m and 6pm.
They close at 10pm in London
and in Cardiff, and they’re shut
altogether in Belfast.
Mark, do you want to
kick us off with this?
Yes, sure.
I mean the first thing to say
is that this virus transmits
in indoor spaces more easily than it
does in the outside,
and the second thing is that,
going back to the last question,
the reason the numbers are not going
down is because we are on average
making too many social contacts,
and so we know that the lockdown
works because when this pandemic
started, with tight restrictions it
did come under control.
And restaurants, cafes,
it depends how people are seated,
how people behave, it depends
whether they are inside or outside,
and I think that when you read
through, and I read through before
coming on this all the different
restrictions — I look
at Northern Ireland,
at Scotland, at Wales,
I looked at England —
it is very confusing
and it is different.
The bottom line is that we need
to reduce our social contact,
and until we get it down similar
to the levels that we started
with this is not going
to come under control.
And, frankly, we do need to get
on top of the second wave,
and urgency does matter,
and so we’ve just got to get
on with it, and I don’t think it’s
helpful having lots of different
hard to understand rules.
As a scientist, just help us
understand, does it make sense,
then, scientifically,
that the rules are different
in these different areas?
Well, I mean the first thing to say
is that there is not
a perfect science that says,
you know, there isn’t a science that
says what a restaurant is or a cafe,
and nor is there a specific science
that says six people or five
people or seven people.
What has to happen is that our
social distancing has
got to be maintained.
And of course we all
in this together.
I mean, everyone has
a responsibility here.
But the rules have got to be clear,
and I think the argument
for a circuit breaker
is that it is tough
but it is relatively short.
As we heard earlier,
in a month’s time, if we can
get the numbers down,
then we’ve got to get testing
and tracing on top of it rather
than chasing behind.
At the moment, although the numbers
of available test has
gone up dramatically,
it still chasing demand,
and we are only going to decrease
the demand if we actually get on top
of it, and then we can really focus
on outbreak control,
on testing in environments
where the risk is higher,
testing and the health system.
That’s what we have to do.
So your advice would be
to shut them altogether,
for a brief period, orfor a period,
whatever the length?
For a brief period of time,
we’ve really got to get
this under control.
No question.
Jim?
Thanks, Fiona.
Can the panel please explain to me,
following on from Martin’s question,
how the Government is going
to expect employers
in the hospitality sector,
in pubs and wine bars,
to be able to pay their employees’
wages when their businesses
are closed and there is actually no
money coming in?
Itjust doesn’t add up.
Graham, you had your hand up.
Thank you, Fiona.
Again, the level of difference
here across the four nations,
it’s adding to the confusion.
Is it the case that, actually,
it’s a role for some but not for me
because I’lljust pretend I’m
in Cardiff for the purposes of this
meeting or the lunch
that I’m having as well?
I think it’s just too difficult
for people to interpret the rules.
It’s too easy for them
to interpret it for themselves.
So I think looking at the Sage
advice and making the local lockdown
nationwide has to be
the way forward.
Colin?
Thanks, Fiona.
I think there is a point
being missed by a lot of the panel
that Mark onlyjust mentioned
at the end of his point,
that the lockdowns are supposed
to be a time to break the chain
of infection and give time to bring
up the testing and tracing system
to a suitable level so that that
takes over and brings
down the level.
Why are we not hearing
enough about that?
0K.
Miriam?
I mean, this is a sort of two—part
question from Martin,
and obviously our audience has
thrown in their ten—penneth as well.
When is a cafe restaurant,
a restaurant a bar?
Because obviously that affects
whether they can open or not.
And also the fact that it is
different in the four nations.
Do you think it should be one
message, as we’ve heard there?
I mean just now...
Well, firstly, there
obviously has been confusion
about what constitutes as a cafe
and a bar, and we’ve
seen that replicated
elsewhere in the UK as well.
We were hearing RobertJenrick
in the UK Government
cabinet saying that,
because obviously if you’re
going to eat food in a restaurant
or in a cafe in the UK,
in certain parts of the UK,
or in the pub, rather,
that they have to serve
a substantial meal.
He was asked, "Could it be
a pastyT’, so it could be a pasty
if it had a side salad,
or if it had chips.
I mean, if we are dealing with that
level of complexity it’s
very hard to navigate.
Yeah, and I understand that.
In terms of whether we would
have nationwide in the
sense of a UK wide lockdown
the practicalities of that I think
would be very difficult now
for all four
nations because we’ve all gone
in different directions.
I think what we need to do
just now is listen to
the public health advice and follow
whatever it is we ask that the
there.
I think that’s first
and foremost the issue.
I think on the point
on hospitality, there is a
point being overlooked here as well.
Which is that hospitality, and I say
this is somebody who worked in the
industry for a long time,
is an area that is very,
very insecure at the best of times
for workers, and, you
know, we have seen kind of a lot
of zero—hour contracts, a lot of
precarious employment in
the hospitality sector already, and
actually with this pandemic,
as with so much of it,
what it has served to do is not only
create new
vulnerabilities but expose fractures
in our economy that already existed,
The furlough scheme
was mentioned there and I
want to touch upon that.
What we have a replacement
for the furlough
scheme is much better than the cliff
edge that they were looking to do.
It is still deeply inadequate.
It only covers areas
that are in lockdown
and we are still asking people
in many circumstances to make
a significant cut to their wages.
Are they getting
cuts off their rent? cut
off their bills, their food?
No.
What I would like to see
is a roll—out of the
initial furlough initiative that
covers not only areas in lockdown
but also other areas so that we can
cover areas like the performing arts
and the creative sector that
actually are going to remain
relatively closed for
the foreseeable future.
On the point, and this
is my last point, on
hospitality here, when
we inherit out of this
crisis we need to see
a
new deal for workers,
because this has exposed
vulnerabilities that existed for far
too long in our
economy.
We need to ban zero—hour contracts,
we need to root out
precarious work, and we need a real
living wage case that all workers
throughout the UK.
So...
Sorry, I was just going
to come to Douglas.
If you want tojump in, Ian, sorry.
Yeah.
I’m going to begin
the same point again.
There is a huge, big challenge
and problem out there
and, frankly, we are talking about
not unimportant issues, but not
primary issues.
I think the breakthrough
appeared three—tiered
approach.
You know, clearly the country’s
being affected in
different ways, and it’s absolutely
right that some parts of the country
should be subjected to different
rules and regulations than others,
so the three—tier approach is a good
approach, and definitely should
the...
ii
It should be pursued, with great
rare
care taken as to what the lockdown
rare taken as to what the lockdown
issues
care taken as to what the lockdown
issues are and how they might be
applied.
In terms of hospitality,
I’ve got three
sons, two of which are
very heavily involved
in pubs and restaurants
and
bars, so I clearly follow
that quite carefully.
One thing you must remember,
there are a huge number of young
people employed,
and one of the biggest
concerns I have is we
are
going to finish up with a lot of
young people unemployed, so I really
hope we can do something
significant with
hospitality and try and prevent
what could be very significant
unemployment in that area.
Douglas, I mean, hearing
what Miriam’s had to
say and what Ian’s had to say,
in terms of young people’s
unemployment and the furlough
falling off a cliff, do you think
BorisJohnson should be doing more?
So it’s not falling off
a cliff, and I think
that was actually Miriam’s point.
What we have now, first of all,
the furlough scheme...
It’s significantly reduced
in terms of the money
people are going to get.
But when it was introduced it has
protected 9.6 millionjobs
across the United Kingdom, £40
billion of taxpayer money has been
invested protecting these jobs,
{13.5 billion going to the self
employed with about
5 million claims.
This has been a significant,
and one of the most generous schemes
anywhere in the world.
But then you’ve got
Greater Manchester,
the Mayor of Greater
Manchester, in open revolt.
I mean, surely this is not good
for Borisjohnson, because
clearly he wants to bring in some
kind of extra restrictions there and
he has a fight on his hands?
Now, the replacement scheme
is actually very similar,
if you look at the levels of support
that
individuals and employers
have in France,
in Spain, in Germany,
it is
very similar to the two thirds
that the government are paying
in in the United Kingdom compared
to other
countries.
But Ian is absolutely right,
because young people are effectively
the ones that could potentially be
the most affected by this.
First of all, their education, so
many of them did not get to finish
their school education,
they did not get to sit exams,
they went on to college
and university in Scotland
and in other parts
of the United Kingdom,
they had a terrible initial
experience at university, and now
they are going to be paying for this
for much of their lives and the job
market, economic emergency
that we are all going to face is one
that we have to try and treat
extremely
seriously, and I think it is really
young people that we have got to be
thinking about and that is why
the UK Government have introduced
the kick—start scheme and many other
schemes to help young
people into employment,
but, again,
as the Chancellor has said
and the Prime Minister has said,
it is going to be impossible
to save every single job,
but we are putting in place
the tools to hopefully protect
as many of them as possible,
as we have done with the furlough
scheme and the replacement
scheme going forward.
Seema Malhotra.
Well, I was very surprised
to hear that the Job
Support Scheme was talked
about by Douglas Ross
there as being the same
as the furlough scheme, almost the
same, even though Louise Casey has
come out saying that if you are
going to say that you are going to
pay two thirds of someone’s salary,
you should also be saying
that they are only going to be able
to for two thirds of their rent
or pay for two
thirds of the food for their family.
We have got a system
that is currently, and decisions
being made by the Prime Minister
and the Chancellor, that are pushing
people towards destitution,
and the most important thing I think
we need to do right now is to look
at how we both deal with the health
crisis that we are facing,
as well as the economic crisis.
TheJob Support Scheme,
I have had many employers tell me,
that it is not going to incentivise
them to keep on employees,
especially as times get tough again,
and many in the aviation industry
as well who are suffering from
the slowdown and that is because,
actually it is more
expensive to keep people on
part—time — to keep two
people on part—time
than it is to keep one person
on full—time and rather than this,
and they should be looking,
the government should be looking
at what is being done
in Germany and elsewhere
and what the Labour Party has been
saying, to have a proper short hours
scheme that supports people to stay
in work and in theirjobs part—time,
because the cost of long—term
unemployment is much greater
than what we are going to otherwise
have to pay to keep people
in theirjobs, in viable jobs,
that will be there when we come
through this next period and Ijust
want to come back to this first
question as well, when we were
talking about how have
we done under BorisJohnson
versus Nicola Sturgeon,
and let’s be clear, we have had some
of the worst excess death rates
in the world.
Neither has done as well as
they needed to, for our
country, and nor have other
countries have done, and now we are
headed for the worst financial
recession, economic recession,
certainly in Europe,
and I think we have to ask
questions about what
is
going wrong, and we have
to ask those questions
honestly, the Government
has to answer those questions
honestly, and I think that is why it
is important that they continue to
work with the opposition, to listen
to the opposition.
We do need a four nation
approach and we do need to
take the job losses
that are there now
and could be coming,
with a
million facing a cliff edge
at the end of October much more
seriously than the government
is doing now.
Grant.
Thanks, Fiona.
If we are looking for money,
why don’t we, here is a radical
suggestion along the lines of
Yanis Va roufakis this
Yanis Varoufakis this week.
The billions of pounds
that they have been giving
to management consultants,
instead of giving it to them,
why don’t we give it to local
leaders like Andy Burnham,
for his local Test and Trace regime,
let us give it to hospitality
workers, and entertainment
workers who so desperately
needed and been failed?
Yvonne.
Hi.
Like many people, I am really
surprised that when Rishi
Sunak made this announcement back in
March, to support, to put his arms
around everybody and supporters,
that this would suddenly stop, which
feels like it is about to happen.
Because, if we were at war,
we would have a war chest
and we would be continuing,
you would not give up at
the seven months or whatever and I
feel like the Government has went
into one gear and they
have totally shifted
into another one now,
in the
future is looking bleak now for lots
of different people in lots of
different sectors,
different economies,
in certain areas,
in
different parts of the country.
Hummza.
Hi, so to add to Seema’s point
about thejob Support Scheme,
Rishi Sunak also said that
Universal Credit was there
for those whose wages have dropped
and he also proposed cuts
to Universal Credit,
so this is going to cause
the 6 million households £1000
a year and the bottom fifth,
they’re losing 7% of
their disposable income.
I think that this is terrible
economics, because he has taken
£6 billion out of the economy
and that is of a £6 billion
less cash being spent
in a consumer—driven economy,
so he is reducing incomes
for the hassles that actually
have to spend the money,
but as usual, the poorer
—— poor are are paying
the cost of it.
Kate, we have arranged quite far
and wide in this particular debate
and I am just going to bring
you back to the original question,
asked by Martin, when is a cafe
a restaurant and a restaurant
a bar?
There has also been a lot of talk
about that here in Scotland,
as to what cafes can operate,
given that restaurants are shut,
apart from for takeaway.
Does it differ in Edinburgh,
Cardiff, Belfast or London?
Do you think there should be one
rule across the United Kingdom?
So, no, for two reasons.
I also think that we want to take
a four nations approach as
much as possible, so clarity
of messaging is critically important
when dealing with this virus.
However, the simpler the message,
often the harsher it is.
So, if you look at
Scotland for example, I
represent the Highlands,
which has a different rate
of infection than some parts
of the central belt.
We have taken action
to have stricter
restrictions in some
parts of the central
belt than we do in
the
Highlands, because it does lead
to greater compliance, people can
understand what is going on and
there is clearly higher rates there.
Now, that will mean
a slight variation in
what those restrictions are.
The second point, though,
as to why we need different
restrictions is because we are
managing multiple harms.
Now, I don’t have, in
the Scottish Government, the fiscal
levers — I’ve asked for them,
multiple times — I don’t have the
fiscal levers or the financial
resources, because we are not
allowed to borrow to properly
compensate employers.
Now, we are coming,
as you said, to what is a
cliff edge, because there
is no way around it,
the job Support Scheme
is
not a replacement for the furlough
scheme, itjust incentivises
employers, we know
from our own analysis
it is going to cost tens
of
thousands of Scottish
jobs, which will be
exacerbated right across
the
United Kingdom, and ultimately
employers need support.
AsJim said earlier,
hospitality has been
through the most challenging
of times, businesses up and down
the country have made
enormous sacrifices,
have invested, but right now,
with less resources and the prospect
of a cliff edge with furlough coming
to an end, they are having to make
very difficult choices and for me
to the UK Government is that,
if there are going to be
these restrictions,
if we manage the health harms
as well as the Covid harms
and with our primary objective right
now of suppressing the virus,
because actually suppressing
the virus is the fastest way
of getting back to some form
of normality, economically
or socially, if we can suppress
the virus, then we can restart,
but when it comes to financial
support and Douglas mentioned
a short while ago about business
support in this break period
that we have got, a two week period,
one of the challenges was waiting
for the Chancellor to make
an announcement last Friday
on what they were going to do
in terms of additional
financial support.
That’s not fair, Kate.
Because it’s one of our primary
sources for the Scottish Government,
a primary source of funding,
that is the primary means
by which we have to compensate
and mitigate the effects.
Now, we largely work together
quite cooperatively,
but I think it is ludicrous that
just as we are seeing the rate
of infection increase
and the likelihood of restrictions,
greater restrictions,
we are seeing the end of what has
been a lifeline and I accept,
I have been open and honest,
that it has been a lifeline
for many businesses.
Now is not the time to end it.
Everybody can see it.
ﬂ
I have been open and honest in
accepting it has been a lifeline to
many businesses.
Every business the length
and breadth of the country can see
it, but the Chancellor cannot appear
to see it, no matter how many
times it is put to him.
But, Kate, infairness,
you and the Labour Party welcomed,
when the Chancellor announced
the replacement furlough,
you both welcomed it at the time
and you said it was right
that there was a replacement,
there was no cliff edge,
but say you were waiting
for the Chancellor to outline any
further support that you could give,
the Chancellor has now said Scotland
will get £700 million more.
On Friday, and I was
thankfulfor it.
Why then today did Nicola
Sturgeon announced that
it would stilljust be £40 million
going to the businesses affected?
£40 million that will
not be available...
You do appreciate that
that is for health?
It is for health,
not just for business
support.
Kate, it’s not!
It is for the £3000
grants that the UK
Government are giving
to businesses in England
that you could give
to
businesses in Scotland.
They are waiting right
now, they have had to
wait ten days, sorry, cake,
if I canjust finish,
—— sorry, Kate, because this
is really important
to the businesses that
are
watching this, because I spoke
to them on Monday, I had a virtual
summit with businesses
and they are crying out for help
and crying out for help now,
so give them that £700
million you got from
the Chancellor or give them...
Kate, Kate, give them some...
It is based on an absurd position.
Give them some of the £250
million that you haven’t
spent through the
Scottish growth fund.
That is an inaccuracy.
Why not spend that...
Hang on, if you both talk
at the same time, no one can
hear.
Let’s let Kate answer.
There are two points I would make,
one, small grants of one and a half
thousand pounds is no replacement
for the furlough scheme, that is
point number one.
Point number two is that
that £700 million, worth
asking the Chancellor,
that does notjust
cover business support,
that is
for health, that is for transport
and a whole host of other things,
just for clarity.
The third point is that
the business support that we
have put in place is more generous
than the UK Government support.
It is.
The facts are there.
It is not.
At the moment, and the rest of
the UK, if you are obliged by law to
close, you will get a grant and all
the businesses in the supply chain
will not get funding and other
businesses that are not directly
impacted will not get funding.
In Scotland, we have provided
funding for the businesses
required to close by law,
but also the businesses
in the supply chain
and the businesses which might see
reduced trading, but are not
required to close by law.
I think that is the
breadth of support
that we need to see,
but let us not kid ourselves,
£1,500 of grant, important as it
is, is no replacement
for the furlough scheme.
OK, I’m going to take another
question, but before I
I’m going to take another question
now from Colin Campbell.
Thank you, Fiona.
A recent poll shows
that the Scottish issue of
independence has a huge
majority of 58% support.
How long can the UK Government
continued to deny the
Scottish people the right
to have their say on the future?
Now, Douglas, you have
said before that
London is in part responsible
for the support for independence in
Scotland.
Do you want to expand on that?
Well, just to answer
the question, I don’t
downplay the challenge
that we
face, people in Scotland like me,
who believe in the Union, who
believe in Scotland’s
proud place as part
of the four nations
of the
United Kingdom, but I also don’t
believe there is anything inevitable
about this, despite what the SNP
representatives might say on this
panel, because I think
Scotland’s best days
and proudest days are
when
we stand together as part of a union
that we helped to build.
But I also look at this
from a very personal
point of view, I have a wee
18—month—old son, Alistair, he is
sound asleep in Murray
right now back home,
and I look at him and when I see
these polls, I don’t get
downhearted, I get even more
determined than ever before,
to ensure that when he grows up,
he ran be as proud of Scotland,
as part of
it as me, but he can also grow up
in the United Kingdom, rather than a
divided Scotland.
That is what I want.
So, yeah, we have got to look
at these polls, we take it
seriously, but those of us
who believe in the union,
who will fight for the union,
have to work harder
and better than ever
before, to promote
what Scotland gets from
the
Union and what Scotland
gives to the union.
And how much responsibility do
you think the Westminster
government has to play
in the support for the union here?
I have said in my speech
to party members...
For independence, sorry,
I said union, of course I meant
independence.
I knew where you are going, Fiona.
I said to party members,
you know, we need to do far
more and all of us do,
all of us who believe in the union
have to work far harder to promote
that case for
what Scotland gets from the union.
Have you spoken to the
Prime Minister about it?
Yes, yes, I have, I have spoken
to the Prime Minister,
I have spoken to MP5,
I have spoken to previous MPs
and previous prime ministers or not
prime ministers,
but politicians, from just, that
voted for the established and since
devolution was established in 1999,
there has been a feeling, in London,
by successive UK governments that
only aids the nationalist cause.
But for me there are
so many things to
be passionate about for the union,
what we should be fighting for and
that argument is as strong today
as it was six years ago
when we had our referendum in 2014.
Miriam.
Yes, I think the first
point to make here
is that the campaign for
independence hasn’t actually started
yet.
I would argue that Westminster
isjust making the campaign in and
of itself, it is increasing appetite
for independence, just by virtue of
the actions it has taken and I am
not surprised to see a growing
appetite for independence, I think
we have had a multitude of factors
and I don’t think there
is any one single factor
that has increased
the
support for independence.
I think there have
been a multitude of
things.
You know, I think it is important
to bear in mind where we
were prior to this, we had faced
a decade of austerity from a
government we did not vote for,
we saw a Brexit vote pushed through
from another government
we didn’t vote for,,
backed by billionaire financiers
and when Scotland voted
Remain, it didn’t make
an ounce of difference.
Now, we see the pushing
through of the Internal Market Bill,
which I think, and you know,
to quote Mark Drakeford, the Welsh
First Minister, that this is
an enormous power grab, we are seen
a shoring up, a concentration
of power is in Westminster,
from devolved
measures and that matters most now,
because what that does it set the
standards going forward
for goods and services.
Now, that is important,
because we are heading
into trade deals and I’d argue
that it is not going to be the UK
Government that are going
to set the standards,
it is probably going
to
be the US and whoever
our future trade deals
are with and frankly,
we
are going to see a race
to the bottom and I think it is very
imminently clear that areas
like our NHS will be on the table.
We have already seen
concerns from farmers
and we have already seen concerns
from environmental campaigners and
unions about what the prospects
of that might be.
Miriam, the UK Government have
always been at pains
to say the NHS will
not be on the table.
The UK Government also voted
against, if I am correct in
remembering here, voted
against an amendment to the trade
bill to protect the NHS
against foreign
interference, to protect wages,
did you vote against that?
It is absolutely
categorical that the NHS
is not up for sale
in these trade deals.
I would like to hear
from the audience.
You have delighted us
long enough, Douglas.
Kate McLaren.
Thanks, Fiona.
I am just wondering,
having been through the previous
independence referendum, and then
the chaotic fallout of praxis,
whether you voted Remain or Leave,
when people will start to realise
that referendums are not the right
way to decide anything?
Susan Lingen, I will
come to a minute,
first of all let me hear from Susan.
I would like to know who’s
requesting all opinion polls at the
moment.
The UK is currently facing
an economic and a health crisis, of
epic proportions, and surely
constitutional questions are just a
complete irrelevance at the moment?
Can we just focus on what really
matters right now, as one United
Kingdom?
Ian.
I think we had referendum
five years ago, it is an
important question, we should
absolutely not be addressing it
again.
What has gone completely wrong
in the last two or three years
is that we have got a Scottish
Government who generally are
adversarial and negative
about a whole range of things that
might happen with the UK
and Scotland
working together and
that we should be at.
We don’t have a devolved government
that is just looking
after Scotland at all,
we are a devolved government
who are focused on independence
and what we need is
a devolved government that
will work with UK Government.
You know, I have a list of six
different things here
which could happen, but right now
are being held back because frankly
the Scottish Government position
is they don’t really want to get any
big help from the UK Government,
because somehow it will cut across
the devolution rights.
The structure and the system
right now itjust
isn’t working.
If we could get that sorted out,
and honestly get both
governments working together
on a whole range of quite exciting
things that could be done,
then we would be
able to look ahead.
We are not.
With great respect, the SNP have one
objective in mind and that is
independence.
Their actualjob is to look
after the Scottish people and
to get the best deal
for the Scottish
peopla and that is not
the
top priority right now.
Kate.
I fundamentally
disagree with that and
I had an answer I talked
about the need to extend
the furlough scheme and welcoming it
when it was an
announced, clearly I do
have a very vested
interest in ensuring
that the
UK Government delivered for
Scotland, but actually on this, I
agree with Douglas Ross in his
maiden speech to the Conservative
Party conference a few weeks ago,
where he stated that his
Conservative, and that I think
is the bottom line and that is
precisely why we are seeing
an increase in the polls.
Now, the polls arejust
indicative of public
opinion, but we had the ninth
consecutive pole showing the
majority of support
for independence.
Do you think the falling
out that there has been
between Nicola Sturgeon
and Alex Salmond has been
helpful in that regard?
Well, I think more people
are interested right now in ensuring
the businesses get support and that
we suppress the virus and also
making decisions about their
long—term future, because they can
see, certainly the polls prove this
point, they can see that Scotland’s
best interests are preserved
by a Scottish Government.
The question for me
is what is the democratic
route to delivering that?
That is a question that
I would pose to the
Conservatives, because certainly it
is unsustainable and undemocratic to
keep saying no.
We have got an increased,
a consistent increase in
the polls, we have got
another poll yesterday
saying that two thirds
of
people in Scotland think
that there should be
another referendum in
the
next five years.
What about Susan’s point,
with Brexit looming and what
that may bring, and with being in
the middle of a pandemic, that this
is something that should be put
on the back burner for now?
And that is precisely why,
right now, certainly
from a Scottish Government
perspective, every minute of my day
is spent in dealing with the virus
and dealing with economic fallout
the virus.
But clearly there are going to be
questions, if you take
one question like economic recovery,
the last time we saw the UK
Government borrowing
to these levels was 2008,
in the aftermath of
the
financial crash.
Now that was followed...
BY
Bya
By a decade of Astarte were the
poorest in society paid for the
failures and as we come out of this
crisis, I
crisis, Iwant
failures and as we come out of this
crisis, I want to ensure that we are
investing in people, we are
investing in infrastructure and we
investing in infrastmclure and we
deal
investing in infrastructure and we
deal with our...
our public finances
in a fundamentally
different way.
That will require financial
powers, fiscal powers to
be in the hands of the
Scottish Government, not...
I’m just going to get to the rest
of the panel because
I am worried that we might then end
because we may run out of time.
Seema Malhotra, so the question is,
how long can the UK Government
continue to deny the Scottish people
the right to have a say on
their future?
If Keir Starmer was Prime Minister,
would he give them
that right?
Well, we have said that we will be
going in to the next
Scottish elections opposed
to a referendum and opposed to
independence and I think it comes
back to the point that we are in the
middle of a pandemic and itjust
is very surprising to me that Kate
talked about investment
and she talked about the polling
data, but I am surprised she did not
mention,
for example, the child poverty
figures that are out today, which
show that child poverty
in Scotland is a 24%
and rising and rising
as
well in Nicola Sturgeon’s own
constituency and in Glasgow and I
think that we are missing the point
about what we should be really
focused on.
People’s health, jobs,
the economy, education, children
this year who have seen a disrupted
education is not going to magically
correct itself next year and, look,
I just feel that the last thing
people are going to want,
is another divisive
referendum, when there
is
such important issues to focus on...
To rebuild our health system with
our NHS still under strain, with...
A lot more to come,
our economy, withjobs
possibly not back,
as
they...
With education, retraining and older
with education, retraining and older
peopla...
Losing theirjobs and catching up
with younger people.
I think that these
are the really critical
issues and that is why
the
Scottish Labour Party has been
focusing on these issues and that is
what they will want to be talking
about, because this is where so much
of the polling also
shows that people’s
priorities are across
the
United Kingdom and I will make this
final point, people in my
constituency, myself, many others,
across the Kingdom have got friends
and family in Scotland and we
remember how divisive the last
referendum was.
Then we saw the Brexit
referendum, with all the
division that that brought.
I think people want
a period of healing,
they want the country,
the whole country to be working
together and that is certainly
were Keir Starmer
is focused, because if
he is Prime Minister,
as I hope he will he,
he
wants to be Prime Minister of the
whole of the United Kingdom and I
think that that is how we will
tackle these major issues, like
child poverty, like aspiration and
like prosperity to make sure that
that reaches all
parts of our nation.
Thank you.
Mark, you wanted to come in.
Yes.
My father, who will be 102
weeks’ time was born in
Glasgow, my mother in London.
My wife’s family came from Aberdeen,
Edinburgh, Manchester and
the south of England.
I worked in health
service where people came
from all over the country
and indeed, all of the world and the
great science that has been done
in the UK again, again, it’s very
international, and I think
my answer is obvious.
I think it is.
I think we know where you stand.
There are a few hands up.
We have got very little time
left, we just want to
get round afield
of view, if we can.
Lucas.
So, I am coming from a place
of growing up in England and
coming to a Scottish university,
I was originally very proud of the
Union.
But then seemingly all my Scottish
friends that I have made
here at uni are all
pro independence.
On the point made that it is
important that we look for
health, healing and
ambition and prosperity,
seemingly what most
of
my friends say is that the
opportunities for Scotland outside
of the United Kingdom,
potentially being back
in the European Union
or
making their own way
as the UK and Britain
have said, we are going
to
ourselves, those opportunities
are so much greater
than if we are stuck
here in the United Kingdom and being
consistently held back
by Westminster, that continues to
prioritise London over
any other part of the UK.
Tonight are questions came
from Edinburgh, as we can see,
and next week we will be joined
by our
audience in Sedgefield, alongside
Nobel prize—winning economistjoseph
stiglitz, so that should
be quite a programme.
The week after that, our audience
comes from Lincoln, so do
please get in touch
if you are from either of those
areas and you want to
be on the programme.
You can go to the Question
Time website and
follow the instructions there.
Adrian Chiles and guests are
on Question Time Extra Time on Five
Live now.
That is just about to start
and you can see on the screen
how to get in touch with them.
Thank you very much to the panel
for coming tonight.
Mark and Seema, thank
you very much for doing your
part down the line, being part
of the debate and, of course, to our
audience, ourvirtualaudience,
thank you to you and of course,
thank you to you at
home for watching.
From Question Time, goodbye.
APPLAUSE.
RADIO: BBC ONE is to launch a new
daytime programme
hosted by Gethinjones
and Kym Marsh.
PHONE RINGS
Kym. Time to get a team together.
What, now? Now!
Hi, Kym.
Hey. Gethin? I’m on my way.
Ooh!
MUSIC: Don’t Stop
by Dua Lipa
MOBILE BUZZES
PHONE RINGS
Perfect timing. Join Kym and Gethin
for Morning Live.
I hope they turn up!
# Now I beg to see you dance
just one more time
# So dance for me, dance for me,
dance for me, oh—oh
# When you’re done,
I’ll make you do it all again... #
It’s what we’ve all been
waiting for.
Strictly, the brand—new series:
There is so much news today, this
is going to be a bumper Newscast.
It’s going to be like one of those
Christmas selection boxes where it’s
got everything in it.
Everything in it, and everything
that you like talking about?
Well, like talking about, but not
necessarily like the subjects,
but anyway you can see
where I’m going.
I see.
So, anyway, you’re going to have me,
Kuenssberg, Mason...
LAURA GASPS
..the return
of Katya Adler.
Hooray!
Who is in Brussels.
And, if that wasn’t enough variety,
we are then going to have
Fergus Walsh, and we are going to be
in conversation with
a member of Sage.
That’s definitely 3 Fruit & Nut,
3 Twix, a Snickers,
a Classic Dairy Milk,
and 3 Mars bar.
With, like, a Bounty
in there as well.
Galaxy?
Curly Wurly?
Let’s just all list chocolates.
That’s actually what we’re
going to do instead!
That would be true to form.
So all of that to look
forward to on this bumper
selection box of Newscast.
Hello, it’s Adam in the studio.
And Laura in the same studio —
two metres apart.
And Chris, about 20 metres down
the corridor in my socially
distant layer of news.
And Katya, quite a lot further away,
but close in my heart.
Unfortunately, for you,
Katya, it’s going to be
slightly longer still,
because we got lots of coronavirus
to talk about before we get
to the view from Europe.
So are you 0K to sit tight
for a number of minutes?
Absolutely.
We’ll be back with you.
50 lots of news on that front today,
lots more areas being put into tier
two, the high alert level,
with no more mixing indoors
between other households apart
from a few exceptions,
and the new areas in tier two,
as it’s called technically,
London, Essex, but not
Southend and Thurrock, York,
north—east Derbyshire,
Chesterfield, part of Derbyshire,
Elmbridge in Surrey and Barrow
in Furness in Cumbria.
And it means that about half
the population is now
under extra restrictions.
Of England.
Compared to where we
were a few days ago.
This will come in at midnight
on Friday, so when we wake up
Saturday morning we will be
in a different era, so in that
context it has been a very,
very big day.
A big step further towards tighter
restrictions everywhere.
But, also, a big rise
in the political tensions.
Something been brewing all week.
We spoke about it earlier,
didn’t we, the clash between local
and national leadership,
and more than anything else a big
north—south divide?
Here’s how that clash
has been playing out.
This is Matt Hancock
in Parliament today...
The Liverpool City Region moved
into the very high level yesterday,
and I want to thank the local
leadership for their public service
and cross—party teamwork
in the face of this virus.
We’ve developed a substantial
package of support for areas that
enter this third tier,
and this includes more support
for local test and trace,
more funding for local enforcement
and theJob Support Scheme,
of course, alongside the offer
of help from the armed services.
Well, how’s that going
with the people who might be
put into Tier 3?
Here’s Andy Burnham,
Mayor of Greater Manchester.
He’s not happy...
They are willing to sacrifice jobs
and businesses here to try
save them elsewhere.
Greater Manchester,
the Liverpool City Region,
and Lancashire are being set up
as the canaries in the coal mine
for and experimental,
regional lockdown strategy